# SDLCAssignment
SDLC Class Assignment

Introduction
This document represents the software development plan for the Library Management System (LMS), a product requested from our company by the local library. LMS is a console-based application used to store, add, remove, and look up patrons and their associated information through the use of a command line interface (CLI). Our primary objective is to create a tool that accomplishes these goals and is simple enough to be understood without any prior training.
Requirements Definition
When opened, LMS should have a console-based main menu that provides numbered options for viewing a list of all patrons in the system, adding patrons manually, adding patrons via text file, removing patrons by their ID number, and exiting the program. Entering the corresponding number in the CLI should execute the option. Each patron will have a unique 7-digit ID number, a first and last name, an address, and an overdue fine amount that can range from $0 to $250. 
Adding patrons manually should prompt the user for each piece of information one at a time. The information order shall be the 7-digit ID number, first name, last name, address, and fine amount. After an addition has been made, confirmation should be displayed, and then the user should be returned to the main menu. Adding patrons from a text file will require the text file to also be formatted in this same order while using “-“ as our delimiter aside from the first and last name which will be separated by a space. When selected, the system should prompt the user for a file location and, when entered, display confirmation that a text file was read and patrons were added successfully, or that an error has occurred. The system should then return to the main menu. Removing patrons should prompt the user for a patron ID then, when the ID is entered, the system should display confirmation that a deletion has occurred and return the user to the main menu. When the option to display all patrons in the database is selected, the system should display all the information for each patron in labeled columns with each new row being a different patron. The system will then prompt the user to press enter to return the main menu. All data will be stored locally, and a relational database will not be used.
Requirements Gathering
In LMS, the user needs to have clearly defined options and confirmations that changes have been made or that errors have occurred. The user needs to be able to choose whether to add patrons manually, add patrons from a text file, remove patrons, or view all patrons in the system from a main menu. Any time information is needed to be entered into the CLI from a user, the system must prompt the user for the information that needs to be entered and inform the user of any formatting restrictions that may occur. After additions or removals from the system have been executed by the user and confirmations have been displayed, the user needs to be returned to the main menu. Displaying all patrons in the system should not automatically return the user to the main menu, however. When all patrons are displayed, the system should prompt the user to press enter to be returned to the main menu.
The expectation of the user is that each menu option will be numbered and entering the corresponding number will run the command. The user expects that they will have main menu options for adding patrons manually via the CLI, adding patrons through a text file by entering a file path, removing patrons by their ID number, and viewing all patrons in the system. 
Implementation Plan
The first section to be tackled will be the patron class. A Patron class should be created that holds string variables for firstName, lastName, and address. An int variable will be used to hold IDNum, and a double variable will be used to hold fineAmount. The Patron class will have one basic constructor with no parameters that will set string variables to an empty string, the ID number to “0”, and the fine amount to “0” initially. Additionally, there will be an overload constructor that contains a parameter for each variable. The class will also contain getters and setters for each variable. Finally, the class will override the toString method and return the patorn’s ID number, first name, last name, address, and fine amount with each variable in its own column. The MainMenu class will be developed next, and each function will be tackled in the order it appears in this section of this Software Development Life Cycle Plan.

The MainMenu class will contain our main method that will welcome the user to the LMS, display the main menu, and wait for the user’s selection. This method shall include a private ArrayList for storing the patrons locally, and a private Scanner for gathering user input. The MainMenu class will also have a method for each menu option. 
ManualAdd will be the method for adding patrons manually. When selected, this method will prompt the user to enter the new patron’s information in the proper order, store each piece of information in a temporary variable, and once all the information has been gathered, the method will instantiate a new patron with the overload constructor and then add that patron to the ArrayList. Confirmation will then be printed to the console, and the user will be returned to the main menu.
The AddFromFile method will prompt the user to enter a file path, attempt to open the file path, and parse through the information using a dash as a delimiter while adding each piece of information to a temporary variable. The method will have to be able to detect the space between the first and last name and separate them as well as know when a patron’s information line has ended, so that extra information isn’t added to the same patron or overwritten. After this information is stored in temporary variable, the method will use the Patron overload constructor to instantiate a new patron and then add that patron to the ArrayList. Once completed, confirmation will be displayed to the console, and the user will be returned to the main menu. If there is an error attempting to open or read the file, an error will be displayed in the console, and the user will be returned to the main menu.

The RemovePatron method will prompt the user to enter a patron ID number and search the ArrayList for any instance of Patron containing that ID number. If one is found, that instance will be removed from the ArrayList and confirmation will be displayed to the user. If no instance of patron with that ID number is found, the system will inform the user that no patron was found. In either case, the user will then be returned to the main menu.

The ViewAllPatrons class will utilize a for-each loop to iterate through the ArrayList containing all instances of Patron and use their overridden toString function to print their information to the screen. If the list of patrons is empty, the system will notify the user. In either case, the system will tell the user to press enter to return to the main menu and then do so when enter is pressed.
To aid in visualizing the methods and variables needed, a UML diagram has been provided:
 

Testing Plan
As this is a console-based program, the testing environment will be at your own computer with your own IDE. Each function must be tested individually for functionality and its ability to catch erroneous inputs from the user. First, the main menu will be tested by running the application. If the application compiles and runs, we can test the “exit” option by entering “0” and making sure it exits the program. Once this is confirmed to function properly, we run the application again and test the ManualAdd function by entering the corresponding number. When prompted to enter an ID number, we will test to see if a string is allowed to be entered and make sure we receive a prompt telling us to enter an integer instead. For the first and last name prompts, we will enter a blank space and nothing else, and test that we are prompted by the system to not enter a blank name. We will do the same for address as well. When prompted for the fine amount, we will try to enter a string to test that the system prompts us to enter a double instead. Once the information is entered correctly, we should be returned to the main menu and can proceed to testing the ViewAllPatrons function.
In the main menu, we will enter the corresponding number, and test that the patron we manually entered earlier is displayed properly and that the system is waiting for the user to press enter to return to the main menu.
At the main menu, we can test the RemovePatron function by entering the corresponding number, and when prompted to enter a patron’s ID number, we will attempt to enter a string instead. This should prompt us with an invalid input and ask the user to enter an integer. We will then enter the correct ID number of the patron we manually added earlier, and press enter. We should receive confirmation of deletion and be returned to the main menu at this point. We will then enter the ViewAllPatrons menu option to verify that the list of patrons is empty. Then we will return to the main menu.
Once at the main menu again, we will test the functionality of the AddFromFile method by entering the corresponding number. When prompted to enter a file path, we will enter a random string of keyboard characters to test that we receive an error, are told that file could not be found, and are returned to the main menu. We will then enter the AddFromFile method and enter the proper file path to our text file containing our list of patrons. We should receive confirmation of the number of patrons added from the file and be returned to the main menu. Once returned to the main menu, we will reenter the ViewAllPatrons screen and verify that the patrons from our text file have been added with their corresponding information in the correct columns.
